\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c GNUstep installation instructions
@c %**start of header
@setfilename gnustep-howto.info
@settitle GNUstep HOWTO
@c %**end of header
@set HOWTO
@setcontentsaftertitlepage
@smallbook

@titlepage
@title GNUstep HOWTO
@subtitle Installing the GNUstep developement system

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@emph{This document explains how to build the different components of
the GNUstep core libraries.}

Last Update: @today{}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{}  1996 - 2001 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
   
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation.

@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@format
   GNUstep HOWTO
   *************

   Last Update: @today{}

   This document explains how to build the different components of the
   GNUstep core libraries.

   Copyright (C) 1996 - 2001 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
   
   Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
   under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
   any later version published by the Free Software Foundation.
@end format

@end ifinfo

@include version.texi

@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)

@menu
* Introduction::                
* Summary::                     
* Compiling and Installing::    
* Additional Installation::     
* Tools and Applications::      
* Machine Specific::            
* Anonymous CVS::               
* Other::                       
@end menu

@node Introduction, Summary, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

This document explains how to build the GNUstep core libraries. The core
libraries, along with associated tools and other files provide
everything necessary for a working GNUstep system.

In order to easily compile and debug GNUstep projects, you will need the
GNU Objective-C compiler @samp{GCC} as well as various other GNU packages.

You will need at least 80Mb of hard disk space (150Mb prefered) in order
to compile the GNUstep core libraries.  

@node Summary, Compiling and Installing, Introduction, Top
@chapter Summary

In order to compile the libraries, you need to compile and install
the following packages first (if you don't already have them):

@itemize @bullet
@item gcc (Version 2.8.0 or greater)
@item GNU make (Version 3.75 or greater)
@item The TIFF library (libtiff) (Version 3.4beta36 or greater)
@end itemize

After installing these packages, get the following individual packages:

@itemize @bullet
@item gnustep-make
@item gnustep-base
@item gnustep-gui
@item gnustep-xdps
@item gnustep-xgps
@end itemize

See @url{http://www.gnustep.org} for information on where to get these
packages.  Only one of gnustep-xgps or gnustep-xdps is required. We
currently recommend gnustep-xgps.  Other packages you may need to get
depending on the type of system you are using, include:

@table @samp
@item WindowMaker (Version >= 0.62)
GNUstep and WindowMaker work together to provide a consistant interface.
Although it is not required, GNUstep will work much better if you use it
with the WindowMaker window manager. In addition, WindowMaker includes some
functionality that GNUstep uses that would otherwise not be available.
Get WindowMaker from @url{http://www.windowmaker.org}.

@item DGS, the XFree86 DPS extension, or Adobe DPS
If you want to use the features of a Display Postscript
(DPS)backend. Note that it is not required since you can use the XGPS
backend that is Xlib based.  Note that the DPS backend is also still
experimental and not recommended.  DPS can be obtained from the
following locations:

@itemize @bullet
@item DGS client/server, @url{ftp://ftp.gnustep.org/pub/gnustep/dgs}
@item XFree86 DPS, @url{http://dps.sourceforge.net/}
@item Adobe DPS, (contact your OS distributor)
@end itemize

@item PCThreads
For GNU/Linux systems on Intel x86 processors. PCThreads is
no longer necessary (and should not be used) on GNU/Linux systems with
glibc version 2, such as Debian 2.0 and RedHat 5.x and greater.

@item GDB and Objective-C patch
GDB can be obtained from @url{ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/gdb}. The patch to
make it work better with GNUstep can be obtained from
@url{ftp://ftp.gnustep.org/pub/gnustep}
    
@item libxml
The libxml library (Version 2) is used to translate some of the
documentation for GNUstep and to provide suport for MacOS-X compatible
XML-based property-lists. It is recommended but not currently required.

@item openssl
The openssl library is used to provide support for https connections by
the NSURL and HSURLHandle classes.
It is recommended but not currently required.

@item libiconv
Unicode support functions (iconv) come with glibc version 2.1 or greater. If
you don't have this, you can get the separate libiconv library
from @url{ http://clisp.cons.org/~haible/packages-libiconv.html}. However,
neither one is required to use GNUstep.

@item ffcall libraries
This is a library that provides stack frame handling for NSInvocation
and NSConnection. This library is highly recommended. The previous
builtin method for stack frame handling is no longer supported and
may be removed in the future.

@item libobjc library snapshot (for gcc version <= 2.95.2)
This is a special version of the Objective-C runtime that include several
bug fixes and features that have not been officially released yet.
It is available at @url{ftp://ftp.gnustep.org/pub/gnustep/libs} which
compiles using the GNUstep Makefile package (so you don't have to get the
entire gcc dist). Make sure to set the THREADING variable in the GNUmakefile.
It might also be best to compile the library static (make shared=no) and
just copy to the place where the gcc libobjc library is (type gcc -v to
get this location).
@end table

@node Compiling and Installing, Additional Installation, Summary, Top
@chapter Compiling and Installing the packages

Make sure you install all the previously mentioned libraries first
before configuring and building GNUstep (Except you need to install
libobjc after installing gnustep-make, unless your installing it as part
of gcc).

Note: you will need to be able to install packages as root (at least
the base library) for applications to work correctly.

For installation on MinGW systems, read the README.MinGW file in the 
make package.

@menu
* DPS System::                  
* Core Package::                
@end menu

@node DPS System, Core Package, Compiling and Installing, Compiling and Installing
@section Using a Display Postscript System

Install a Display PostScript system if you want to use the XDPS backend.
You do not need it if you want to use the XGPS backend.
Some systems, like Sun Microcomputers(TM) already have a DPS system installed.
Linux/GNU systems need to use a free implementation of DPS (described in
the Introduction.)

If you are installing DGS, follow the installation instructions included with
the DGS package. If you are installing the XFree86 DPS extension, follow the 
instructions included with that package (and note that you need to be
running XFree86 version 4.0 or greater).

@node Core Package,  , DPS System, Compiling and Installing
@section Installing the Core Libraries

The GNUstep packages uses the Autoconf mechanism for
configuration; it checks some host capabilties which are used by
all GNUstep software.  To configure just type:

@example
./configure
@end example

The GNUstep makefile package needs a root directory.  If the
GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT environment variable is set then configure will
use its value as the root directory.  You can also specify the root
directory when you run configure with the prefix paramter; the
following command makes /usr/local/GNUstep the root directory:

@example
./configure --prefix=/usr/local/GNUstep
@end example

If you do not have the GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT environment variable set
and you do not specify a root directory when running configure, then
configure will use /usr/GNUstep as the default root directory.

@menu
* Alternate Library Setup::     
* Individual Packages::         
@end menu

@node Alternate Library Setup, Individual Packages, Core Package, Core Package
@subsection Alternate Library Setup

You can specify compilation of alternate libraries by using the
--with-library-combo option:

@example
./configure --with-library-combo=gnu-gnu-gnu-xdps
@end example

to compile with the xdps library rather than the default xgps backend.  
IMPORTANT: The xdps backend is still experimental. Do not use it unless
you are willing to deal with PostScript problems and other bugs.

Read the installation instructions in the Makefile package (make) for more
installation options. Make sure you use the same
configuration options when configuring each GNUstep library.

@node Individual Packages,  , Alternate Library Setup, Core Package
@subsection Building the Package

To build the individual packages, use the familiar set of commands for
each pacakge:

@example
./configure
make
make install
@end example

Start with the Makefile Pacakge (gnustep-make), then do gnustep-base,
gnustep-gui and finally gnustep-xgps (or gnustep-xdps). After installing
gnustep-make you need to execute GNUstep's shell configuration
script, as follows:

@example
 . /usr/GNUstep/System/Makefiles/GNUstep.sh
@end example

before proceeding any further.

NOTE: If you are trying to install the packages without root permission,
you need to change one thing in the base library. Edit the file
gnustep-base/Tools/gdomap.h and uncomment the last line.

@node Additional Installation, Tools and Applications, Compiling and Installing, Top
@chapter Additional Installation

Add the shell script @file{GNUstep.sh} located in the Makefile
package to your shell startup file (such as @file{.profile}). For instance:

@example
GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT=/usr/GNUstep
export GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT
. $GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT/Makefiles/GNUstep.sh
@end example

in your @file{.profile} file will work (Note the period at the beginning
of the line). It defines environment variables that are needed to find
GNUstep files and executables.  Users of csh need to use the
@file{GNUstep.csh} script. Read the make package @file{README} for more
info. Some systems, like GNU/Linux have an @file{/etc/profile.d}
directory where scripts can be executed automatically. If you want to
set up GNUstep for every user on your system, you can try
copying/linking the @file{GNUstep.sh} there. For csh or tcsh, try

@example
setenv GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT /usr/GNUstep
source $GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT/Makefiles/GNUstep.csh
@end example

Set up your home GNUstep directory. This is where user defaults are
kept, and in the future, other files may be kept there.

@example
cd
mkdir GNUstep
@end example

Next, set your local time zone.  There are four ways to do this, pick
one (see @file{$GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT/Libraries/Resources/NSTimeZones/zones} for typical time zones):

@enumerate
@item Use the defaults utility to set ``Local Time Zone'' to your local
time zone (defaults is installed with GNUstep in the Tools directory). Type
something like ``defaults write NSGlobalDomain "Local Time Zone" GB''.

@item Set the @var{GNUSTEP_TZ} environment variable.

@item Create the file @file{$GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT/Libraries/Resources/NSTimeZones/localtime} with the name of the local time zone in it.

@item Set the @var{TZ} environment variable (this may conflict with other
software on your system though).
@end enumerate

If you are using a built-in DPS server, you may need to set the PSRESOURCEPATH
environment variable (on Solaris, it's set to @file{/usr/openwin/lib/X11}).

Set up your system to execute some GNUstep deamons. If you don't do this, they will be started automatically when you run your  first GNUstep app:

@itemize @bullet
@item gdomap - Put this in a system startup file, like @file{/etc/rc.local} or @file{/etc/rc.d/rc.local} (customize for your system)
@example
GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT=/usr/GNUstep
if [ -f $GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT/Tools/powerpc/linux-gnu/gdomap ]; then
  $GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT/Tools/powerpc/linux-gnu/gdomap
fi
@end example
@item gdnc - Put this after executing @file{GNUstep.sh} in your local .profile
@item gpbs - Put this after executing @file{GNUstep.sh} in your local .profile
@end itemize

@example
if [ `gdomap -L GDNCServer | grep -c Found` == '0' ]; then
  echo "Starting GNUstep services..."
  gdnc
  gpbs
fi
@end example


@node Tools and Applications, Machine Specific, Additional Installation, Top
@chapter Test Tools and Applications

Test programs for the base library are in @file{base/Testing}. Example
applications are located in the gstep-examples package.  To make these,
just uncompress and untar this package, cd to the appropriate
directory, and type make. Generally you will need to install GNUstep
first before doing this.

To run the examples. Use the openapp utility that is part of the GNUstep
makefile package (and stored in
@file{$GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT/Tools}). Usage is:

@example
openapp [--library-combo=...] application [additional arguments to app]
@end example

Good Luck!

@node Machine Specific, Anonymous CVS, Tools and Applications, Top
@chapter Machine Specific Instructions

@include machines.texi


@node Anonymous CVS, Other, Machine Specific, Top
@chapter Getting Libraries via Anonymous CVS

   If you didn't get one of the snapshots, or if you want to be sure
to stay on the bleading edge, then you should get the core via CVS:

The quick and painless CVS tutorial (by michael hanni (slightly modified) 

    First, set the CVSROOT environment variable. If you are using
bash/sh you can do something like this at the prompt:
@example
export CVSROOT=":pserver:anoncvs@@cvs.net-community.com:/gnustep" 
@end example

    Second, if this is the first time loging into the CVS server:
@example
cvs login <press enter> 
@end example

    You should get a password prompt soon after:
@example
(Logging in to anoncvs@@cvs.net-community.com) 
CVS password:  
@end example

    Enter the password @samp{anoncvs}. This should return you to your
prompt. From here you can checkout any module in the CVS server you
like. To checkout a module you do this:
@example
cvs -z3 checkout modulename <press enter> 
@end example

    The -z3 merely tells the cvs server to compess everything to a
certain compression level before it sends it to you. 

    If you haven't already done so, change to the directory, where you
want the source to reside.
    
    Next, you want to get the whole core, so you do:
@example
cvs -z3 checkout core
@end example

    After you have checked out the source you can compile it as
usual. To update the source, go into the directory of the source tree
you want to update, for example, go into 'xgps', and type:

@example
cvs -z3 update -Pd
@end example

    You don't have to re-checkout after you have the source, just update!
Also try @samp{cvs checkout -c} to get a list of available modules.

@node Other,  , Anonymous CVS, Top
@chapter Other Instructions

@menu
* Better Debugging::            
@end menu

@node Better Debugging,  , Other, Other
@section Better debugging with Objective-C runtime

Normally, the Objective-C runtime is compiled with debugging information,
which actually makes debugging of user apps frustrating because stepping
into a method call will actually cause gdb to step into the internal
Objective-C method call mechanism, which you don't want most of the time.

The way to avoid this is to compile the Objective-C runtime library without
debugging information. Here's how:

@example
cd egcs-build-directory/gcc
rm -f objc/*.o
make CFLAGS=-O2 libobjc.a
cp libobjc.a your-egcs-installation-dir
@end example



@chapter Acknowledgements

@format
   Authors:  Adam Fedor <fedor@@gnu.org>,
             Pascal Forget <pascal@@wsc.com>,
             Ovidiu Predescu <ovidiu@@net-community.com>,
             Camille Troillard <tuscland@@wanadoo.fr>
             Richard Frith-MacDonald <richard@@brainstorm.co.uk>

   This file is part of GNUstep.
@end format

@bye
\bye
