@c -*-texinfo-*-
@ifclear ANNOUNCE-ONLY
@chapter NEWS

@ifset TEXT-ONLY
@include version.texi
@end ifset

The currently released version is @samp{@value{GNUSTEP-MAKE-VERSION}}.
@end ifclear

@section Changes in version @samp{1.9.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item Application and Bundles use the latest convention on Apple.
@item Improve/Simplify dependency checking when making docs
@end itemize

@ifclear ANNOUNCE-ONLY

@section Changes in version @samp{1.9.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item Remove @code{--disable-import} option
@item README.Darwin for darwin/MacOSX install
@item Framework version and naming clarified.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.9.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Support for building in a separate build dir.
@item Add @code{--enable-strip-makefiles} option to configure
@item List of classes in a framework gets written to the plist file.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.8.0}

Read the NEWS file for a complete list of changes since the last stable
release. The major difference from 1.6.0 is that the locations of certain
directories have changed. Generally this will not cause a problem unless
your GNUstep directory is shared by multiple machines running this and
earlier (1.6.x) versions of the software.

@section Changes in version @samp{1.7.4}

Bug fixes.

@section Changes in version @samp{1.7.3}

@itemize @bullet
@item Adds library combo to Headers directory if not flattened.
@item Add Markup file (Renaissance) support.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.7.2}

--enable-flattened (Flat directory structure) is on by default.

@itemize @bullet
@item On WIN32 use HOMEPATH in preference to USERPROFILE
@item netbsd and openbsd compile fixes.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.7.1}

Bug fixes.

@section Changes in version @samp{1.7.0}

This version contains a major change in the location of certain
directories and installed files as detailed in the @file{filesystem.texi}
document. When installing this version for the first time, all old
directories and files in those directories will be moved to the new 
locations automatically. However, you should update all GNUstep versions
on any machine you have them installed on in order to avoid any
incompatibilities.

Other changes:

@itemize @bullet
@item Support for preprocessed Info.plists.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.6.0}

Make now configures by default for only one system. To compile and run
GNUstep for multiple platforms from the same directory, use the
configure argument --enable-multi-platform.

@itemize @bullet
@item Auto-build def file for DLLs
@item Work natively on MacOSX systems. Now use apple-apple-apple
instead of nx-nx-nx on OSX systems.
@item More efficient checks for re-making a project.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.5.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item Framework support rewritten, also supports multiple names.
@item API change: Replace frameowork's xxx_TOOLS by xxx_COPY_INTO_DIR.
@item Unified link commands between libraries and frameworks (LIB_LINK_*).
@item New 'make strings' target for localization support.
@item Speed improvements.
@item Doesn't try to build OSX bundle on GNUstep and vice versa.
@item API change: Tools/Subproj can have resources.
@item API change: TOOL_INSTALL_DIR.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.5.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Add NetBSD Elf support
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.4.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Update Darwin/GNU gcc and Irix targets
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.3.4}

This is a first prerelease version for 1.4.

@itemize @bullet
@item Use gnugc-gnu-gnu library combo for garbage collecting version.
@item Add support for --library-combo in opentool
@item Change GNUSTEP_PATHPREFIX_LIST to	GNUSTEP_PATHLIST 
@item Add verbosity levels. Use make messages=yes for full messages.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.3.3}

@itemize @bullet
@item Recognizes XXX_STANDARD_INSTALL=no to not do installation.
@item Updated instructions for MingW/MSYS installation.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.3.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item Instructions for building on Windows with MSYS
@item Resolve library dependencies better on Windows
@item Fix frameworks in RPMs and DEBs
@item Continued reorganization.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.3.0}

The package has gone through an extensive reorganization to break up
each sub-make into two separate components. This allows for much
simplified code and lots of code sharing between components. As a side
effect, it also increased the speed of the code by at least a factor of
2.

@itemize @bullet
@item Force shared=yes for cygwin and mingw
@item Bundles copy resources from subprojects. 
@item Better resource management. Resources handled accross all project types.
@item Simplified and fixed user root location between make and base libraries.
@item Changed Apps directory to Applications
@item Fixes for MacOSX, MingW
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.2.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item the source distribution code has been rewritten to be more general
and extended.  Packages built using gnustep-make now automatically
have handy targets building tarballs from sources or from CVS imports.
@item implemented support for auto-dependencies, which means that any object
file automatically depends on all the header files which were used to
build it.  Only works with newer compilers.
@item implemented INSTALL_AS_USER and INSTALL_AS_GROUP.
@item implemented a strip=yes option.
@item various bug fixes and minor improvements.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.2.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item The core rules and internals of gnustep-make have been fundamentally
redesigned and rewritten.  notably, gnustep-make now works using only
a single recursive sub-make invocation rather than two, which makes
it consistently faster and simpler in all circumstances.
@item The clean rules have been heavily optimized - they no longer use 
recursive sub-make invocations at all and so they are really fast.
@item Many improvements to java support. Optimized management of nested classes
@item Better conformance to make conventions.
@item File specific compilation flags 
@item Fixed darwin support
@item Support for C++ files.
@item Made use of library installation dir consistent with other installation.
@item Much improved Windows path support
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.0.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item Support for Java tools.
@item Build GUI backend as a bundle (default). 
@item Remove backend part of LIBRARY_COMBO.
@item Fixes to run on FreeBSD, Solaris.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.0.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Optimizations that in many cases more than double the speed.
@item Added preliminary darwin support.
@item rpm packeing improvements.
@item Better checking for mingw and cygwin
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{0.9.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item HOWTO and faq files moved from core package to here
@item Configurable GNUSTEP_LOCAL_ROOT and GNUSTEP_NETWORK_ROOT
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{0.9.1}

Make has been reoganized so that it only relies on libraries and other things
that are necessary for the Makefile package itself. Any libraries wanting to
add extra package information can do so by installing a make stub in the
@file{Additional} directory. This greatly simplifies compilation and packaging.

@itemize @bullet
@item Javadoc support added.
@item debian directory added for dpkg
@item RPM support rewritten from scratch.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{0.9.0}

ffcall library is highly recommended for use with the GNUstep base
library. You need to have installed it prior to configuring the Makefile
package. See the INSTALL file.

@itemize @bullet
@item Support for automatically generating RPM spec files.
@item Build suitable files for MacOS bundles
@item Add option for flattened directory structure.
@item LaText documentation support.
@item Added support for Frameworks
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.6.6}

The GNUstep system libraries are now installed in a separate system root
directory (default /usr/GNUstep/System) rather than the GNUstep
root directory (default /usr/GNUstep). You can revert to the old behavior
using a configure option @samp{--without-system-root}. We also recommend
removing any previous GNUstep versions before installing the new one in order
to avoid problems with the system finding the correct binary and/or library.

@itemize @bullet
@item Support for Windows compilation (cygwin and mingw) and DLL creation
and usage.
@item Java support rewritten and extended.
@end itemize

@end ifclear
@c end ifclear ANNOUNCE-ONLY
